Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab. This is a free,
complete course for the CCNA. If you like these
videos, please subscribe to follow along with the
series. Also, please like and leave a comment,
and share the video to help spread this
free series of videos. Thanks for your help.
In this video I will introduce Quality of Service,
QoS. QoS is used to give priority to certain types
of network traffic to minimize things like delay
and packet loss. QoS is mentioned in exam topic
4.7. However, that’s not the only thing we’ll
cover in this video. I will also introduce PoE,
Power over Ethernet. PoE allows devices to
receive electric power over an Ethernet cable,
instead of requiring a separate power
cable. I will also introduce voice VLANs,
which is a topic I didn’t mention in the
VLAN section of the course. Although these
topics aren’t directly related to QoS, they are
related to the topic of IP phones, Voice over IP.
QoS is often used to prioritize Voice over IP
traffic from IP phones to ensure the audio quality
is acceptable. So, that’s why I’ve decided to
fit these two additional topics into this video.
They are small topics on the CCNA,
so we can cover them quickly.
Here’s what we’ll cover. First up, I’ll give
a very brief introduction to IP phones as well
as the concept of voice VLANs. IP phones are
telephones which send audio data in IP packets
over IP networks, such as the Internet. Then
I’ll introduce Power over Ethernet, PoE,
which is commonly used to provide electric
power to IP phones over an Ethernet cable,
as opposed to using a separate power
cable. Finally I’ll get to the main topic,
an intro to quality of service, QoS. I will
introduce the basics of QoS and how it works,
and then in the next video we’ll look at some
more details. Watch until the end of the video
for a bonus question from Boson Software’s ExSim
for CCNA, the best practice exams for the CCNA.
So first let’s cover IP phones. Traditional
phones operate over the public switched telephone
network, PSTN. Sometimes this is called POTS,
plain old telephone service. IP phones, on the
other hand, use VoIP, Voice over IP, technologies
to enable phone calls over an IP network,
such as the Internet. Audio data is encapsulated
in IP packets and sent over the network. Here’s
an example of a Cisco IP phone. Cisco IP phones
are used by many enterprises all over the world,
although of course there are other vendors that
make and sell IP phones. IP phones are connected
to a switch just like any other end host. So, you
could do something like this. A PC and an IP phone
at each desk, each connected to its own switch
port. This kind of design works and is an option,
but there is a much better and more common
approach to connecting these devices to a switch.
IP phones have an internal 3-port switch. 1 port
is the uplink, which connects to the external
switch. 1 port is the downlink which connects
to the PC. And 1 port connects internally to
the phone itself. Let me demonstrate. So, we have
a PC, an IP phone, and a regular network switch.
However, within the IP phone there is a
small internal switch with three ports.
One of these is used to connect to the switch
with an Ethernet cable. One connects to the PC,
again with an Ethernet cable. And the last
one connects internally to the phone itself.
This one is internal, you don’t actually have
to take an Ethernet cable and connect it.
So, why is this setup better? It allows the PC
and the IP phone to share a single switch port.
Traffic from the PC passes through
the IP phone to the switch like this.
Traffic from the IP phone itself
can also go to the switch.
So, with the same amount of devices we
can use half the number of switchports,
meaning we need less switches, so we don’t
have to spend as much money buying switches.
Note that it is recommended to separate voice
traffic, which is traffic from the IP phone,
and data traffic, which is traffic from the
PC, by placing them in separate VLANs. I’ll
mention this again later, but when configuring
quality of service, we want to be able to specify
the traffic from the IP phones and give it a
higher priority than the regular data traffic.
So, we can place them in separate VLANs by
configuring a ‘voice VLAN’. When we do that,
traffic from the PC will be untagged, but traffic
from the IP phone will be tagged with a VLAN ID.
So, how can we configure a
switchport to enable this?
Remember, the PC and the IP phone will use
different VLANs. It’s actually quite simple to
configure, you only need one additional command
compared to configuring a regular access port.
Here’s the configuration. I enter interface config
mode for g0/0, configure it as an access port,
assign it to access vlan 10, and here’s the
new command. SWITCHPORT VOICE VLAN 11. With
this configuration, PC1 will send its traffic
untagged, as normal. Remember, another name for
an access port is an ‘untagged’ port. Usually they
only send and receive untagged traffic. However,
SW1 will use CDP, Cisco Discovery Protocol,
to tell PH1 to tag PH1’s traffic in VLAN 11.
So, this access port is now accepting traffic
from multiple VLANs. What kind of interface
usually carries traffic from multiple VLANs?
It’s a trunk port. So, is G0/0 a trunk port?
We configured SWITCHPORT MODE ACCESS, not TRUNK.
So, let’s check what kind of port it actually is.
I used SHOW INTERFACES G0/0 SWITCHPORT. Here we
can see the access VLAN of 10. And here’s the
voice VLAN of 11. But up here, we can see that
both the administrative mode and the operational
mode are static access. So, even though it
carries traffic from two VLANs, 10 and 11,
G0/0 is not considered a trunk port.
It is considered an access port.
Let’s take a look at another command to
confirm that. I used SHOW INTERFACES TRUNK
and nothing was displayed, telling
us that G0/0 is not a trunk port.
Now, even if the interface is an access port,
you can do SHOW INTERFACES, the interface name,
and then TRUNK. That’s what I did here.
Notice that the status is not-trunking,
again telling us that this isn’t considered
a trunk. Now, you might notice that it says
‘Vlans allowed on trunk’ here, but it always says
that in this command, even if its not a trunk.
So, looking back a few slides, instead of
using an individual switchport for each PC
and each IP phone, we can take these three PCs and
connect them to the IP phones. Instead of using
six switchports, we are now using only three. We
configure SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN 10 for the PCs,
sometimes called a data VLAN. And we configure
SWITCHPORT VOICE VLAN 11 for the IP phones.
Okay, so that allows us to use fewer switchports.
But there’s something else we need to connect
to for an IP phone to work. Of course, being an
electronic device, IP phones require electricity.
That means we need to plug them into a wall socket
or some other power outlet to get electricity.
Or, perhaps there’s a better solution that
doesn’t require an extra power outlet.
And there is such a solution, it is
called Power over Ethernet, or PoE.
So, let’s get into PoE, Power over Ethernet.
PoE allows Power Sourcing Equipment, PSE, to
provide electric power to powered devices, PDs,
over an Ethernet cable. Typically the PSE is a
switch and the PDs are IP phones, IP cameras,
wireless access points, etc. To clarify, this is
the same Ethernet cable that is used to transmit
data. You don’t need a separate cable. One cable
is used to provide power and to transmit data.
The PSE, the switch, receives AC power from the
outlet, coverts it to DC power, and supplies
that DC power to the PDs, for example IP phones.
Here’s an example. A switch is connected to a wall
outlet, it is the PSE, power sourcing equipment.
Three IP phones are PDs, powered devices. The
outlet provides AC power, but electronic devices
use DC power. The switch converts the AC power to
DC and provides it to the IP phones. These same
Ethernet cables are also used to transmit data.
But you have to be careful about
providing electrical current to devices.
Too much electrical current can harm electrical
devices. So, PoE has a process to determine if
a connected device needs power, and how much
power it needs if it does. This is a major
simplification, but basically when a device is
connected to a PoE-enabled switch port, the PSE
sends low power signals, monitors the response,
and determines how much power the PD needs.
These first signals are very weak to ensure
that the PSE doesn’t give too much power to
the connected device, causing it harm.
If the connected device needs power,
the PSE supplies power to allow the PD to boot.
Then the PSE continues monitoring the PD and
supplying power as needed, but again not too much
power. There is a feature called power policing
which prevents a PD from taking too much power.
Now, PoE configuration isn’t a CCNA exam topic,
but let me demonstrate just a few commands
for power policing. POWER INLINE POLICE,
configured on an interface, configures
power policing with the default settings.
It will disable the port and send a Syslog
message if a PD draws too much power.
This is equivalent to the command POWER INLINE
POLICE ACTION ERR-DISABLE. Both of these commands
are the default for power policing and have
the same effect. The interface will be put
in an ‘error-disabled’ state and then it can
be re-enabled by issuing the SHUTDOWN command
followed by NO SHUTDOWN. Okay, so that’s one
option for power policing on an interface.
POWER INLINE POLICE or POWER INLINE POLICE ACTION
ERR-DISABLE, same thing. Here’s another option.
POWER INLINE POLICE ACTION LOG does not shut down
the interface if the PD draws too much power.
It will simply restart the
interface and send a Syslog message.
So, because the interface
restarts, the connected PD
will lose power and then restart as well.
Then it will re-negotiate its power needs.
Let me show you those commands in
the CLI. On SW1’s G0/0 interface,
I issued the command POWER INLINE POLICE. Then I
used the command SHOW POWER INLINE POLICE G0/0.
First of all, here you can see how much
power the switch is currently providing
and how much capacity it has. But here’s what
I really want to show you. Even though I didn’t
specify ACTION ERR-DISABLE in the command, you
can see that the default action is err-disable.
Okay, this time I issued the
command POWER INLINE POLICE
ACTION LOG. I did SHOW POWER INLINE POLICE G0/0,
and this time you can see the action is only log,
the interface won’t be err-disabled if
the connected PD draws too much power.
Power policing is one aspect of PoE that
you should be aware of for the CCNA.
Just be aware of its purpose, preventing PDs
from drawing too much power. Okay, let’s move on.
Here are some standards of PoE. Actually, PoE
originally wasn’t PoE, it was Cisco Inline Power,
ILP. As has happened multiple times, for
example with CDP and LLDP, Cisco invented
the technology first for its devices, and then it
was standardized after. Cisco ILP offers 7 watts
of power per port from the PSE, and 2 wire pairs
provide that power. Remember early in the course,
how Ethernet and FastEthernet only used 4 of the
8 wires in an Ethernet cable to transmit data?
They used wires 1, 2, 3, and 6. Well,
Cisco decided to use the other 4 wires,
4, 5, 7, and 8, to provide power. Later, Cisco ILP
was standardized as Power over Ethernet, so other
device makers would be able to use the technology.
PoE and PoE+, also called Type 1 and Type 2,
provide more power than the original Cisco ILP.
Note the standard numbers, 802.3af and 802.3at.
Then, Cisco released another original
non-standard protocol called UPoE,
which stands for Universal Power over Ethernet.
But then a similar standard was released, 802.3bt.
This includes Type 3, offering up to 60 watts,
and Type 4, offering up to 100 watts. Now, you
probably don’t have to memorize this table for the
CCNA. You’re supposed to understand PoE concepts,
what it is and what it’s used for. However, just
in case I will include some flash cards of this
table in the supplemental resources. It’s up
to you if you want to keep them or delete them.
Returning to that previous slide again, the PCs
will still need to be plugged into an outlet to
get their power. But these phones are able to
get power over the same Ethernet cable they use
to connect to the switch. PoE isn’t a
major CCNA topic, but you should know
the information I gave you in this video. Now
finally let’s move on to QoS, Quality of Service.
Why did I spend all this time
talking about voice VLANs and PoE
in a video about QoS? It’s because the voice
data from IP phones is often what we want to
apply QoS to, to give higher priority to the
voice data and ensure high audio quality.
First, here’s an extremely simple
history of why QoS was created.
Voice traffic and data traffic used to use
entirely separate networks. Voice traffic used the
PSTN, public switched telephone network. And what
we call data traffic used IP networks such as an
enterprise WAN or the Internet, for example a PC
accessing a file server over the enterprise WAN.
QoS wasn’t really necessary, because the different
kinds of traffic didn’t compete for bandwidth.
The audio quality of a phone call won’t be
affected if the Internet connection is busy.
However, modern networks are typically converged
networks in which IP phones, video traffic,
regular data traffic such as web traffic, etc,
all share the same IP network. Now, the PSTN
hasn’t disappeared, it’s still used all over the
world, but we’ll focus just on the IP network from
now on. Converged networks enable cost savings
as well as more advanced features for voice and
video traffic. For example IP phones can integrate
with collaboration software such as Cisco WebEx or
Microsoft Teams. However, the different kinds
of traffic now have to compete for bandwidth.
If there is plenty of available bandwidth
and the network isn’t congested,
that’s not a problem, but a busy network can
pose a problem for voice and video traffic
which is sensitive to things such as delay. QoS,
Quality of Service, is a set of tools used by
network devices to apply different treatment to
different packets. Certain kinds of traffic get
higher priority treatment, and other kinds
of traffic get lower priority treatment.
QoS is used to manage the following
four characteristics of network traffic.
First, bandwidth, a term
you’ve certainly heard before.
This refers to the overall capacity of the
link and is measured in bits per second,
for example kilobits per second, megabits
per second, gigabits per second, etc. QoS
tools allow you to reserve a certain amount of a
link’s bandwidth for specific kinds of traffic.
For example, you could reserve 20% of
a link’s bandwidth for voice traffic,
30% for specific kinds of important data
traffic, and leave 50% for all other traffic.
The next characteristic is delay. There
are two main ways to measure delay.
The amount of time it takes for traffic to go
from source to destination is called the one-way
delay. Let me demonstrate. The amount of time
it takes a packet from phone1 to reach phone2
is called one-way delay. Alternatively, we could
measure two-way delay, the amount of time it takes
traffic to go from source to destination and
return. So, not just measuring how long it takes
a packet to go from phone1 to phone2, but also
how long it takes the reply to get back to phone1.
Okay, next up is Jitter. Jitter is the variation
in one-way delay between packets sent by the
same application. So, if some packets arrive in 10
milliseconds, but some arrive in 100 milliseconds,
that’s a lot of jitter, a big difference in
how long it takes for each packet to reach
its destination. Jitter will negatively affect
the audio quality of phone calls, so IP phones
have a jitter buffer to provide a fixed delay
to audio packets. However, if the jitter is too
high it will overrun the buffer and the audio
quality will suffer. Finally, there is loss.
This refers to the percentage of packets sent that
do not reach their destination. This can be caused
by faulty cables, or if the network is congested
and a device’s packet queues get full, it will
start discarding packets that can’t fit into the
queue. If some audio packets don’t reach their
destination, for example, that will obviously
have a negative effect on the quality of the call.
There are a few recommended standards
for acceptable interactive audio quality.
Interactive audio means something like a
phone call, the audio of a Zoom call, etc.
It is recommended that the one-way delay be
150 milliseconds or less. And the jitter,
the variation in delay, should be 30 milliseconds
or less. Finally, the loss should be 1% or less.
If these standards are met, you
can expect a decent experience,
but if the standards are not met there
could be a noticeable reduction in the
quality of the phone call, the user
experience will not be as good.
Now let me introduce the topic of queuing, which
is important for understanding other aspects of
QoS. If a network device receives messages faster
than it can forward them out of the appropriate
interface, the messages are placed in a queue.
For example, this router is receiving packets
on its G0/0 and G0/1 interfaces faster than it
can forward them out of its G0/2 interface. So,
as you can see the queue for its G0/2 interface
starts filling up. By default, queued messages
will be forwarded in a First In First Out, FIFO,
manner. What that means is that messages will be
sent in the order they are received. No special
treatment is given to any kind of traffic.
Now, what happens if the queue becomes full?
Traffic keeps arriving on the G0/0 and G0/1
interfaces faster than the router
can forward the packets out of G0/2
and the queue fills up. When this happens,
new packets will be dropped. So, if this
packet arrives and needs to be forwarded out
of G0/2, but the queue is full, it is dropped.
This is called tail drop, when there is not
enough room in the queue so packets are dropped.
Tail drop is harmful, not just because packets
are lost, but because it can lead to something
called TCP global synchronization. To explain
that, let me review the TCP sliding window.
Hosts using TCP use the ‘sliding window’ to
increase and decrease the rate at which they
send traffic as needed. So, the host will try
to increase the rate at which it sends traffic.
And when a packet is dropped, it will be
re-transmitted. However, when this happens
the sender will reduce the rate it sends traffic.
It will then gradually increase the rate again,
and the process will repeat if another packet
is dropped. When the queue fills up and tail
drop occurs, all TCP hosts sending traffic will
slow down the rate at which they send traffic.
They will all then increase the
rate at which they send traffic,
which rapidly leads to more congestion, dropped
packets, and then the process repeats again.
So, it creates waves of the network being
underutilized, when they all slow down their
rate of transmission, and then congested, when
they all increase their rate of transmission.
Let me illustrate it for you. Network
congestion leads to tail drop,
which leads to a global TCP window size decrease.
By global I mean all hosts sending TCP traffic
will decrease their window size. That leads
to the network being underutilized. All of the
hosts reduce their transmission rate, so they’re
not sending traffic as quickly as they could.
That leads to a global TCP window size increase.
All sending hosts, noticing that they are able to
send traffic more quickly than they currently are,
will increase their window size at the same time.
This leads once again to network congestion,
and the process repeats in waves.
Overutilization, underutilization,
overutilization, underutilization etc.
A solution to prevent tail drop and
therefore prevent TCP global synchronization
is Random Early Detection, RED. When the amount of
traffic in the queue reaches a certain threshold,
the device will start randomly
dropping packets from select TCP flows.
Why is this better than tail drop? Those TCP flows
that dropped packets will reduce the rate at which
traffic is sent, but you will avoid global TCP
synchronization in which ALL TCP flows reduce
and then increase the rate of transmission at
the same time in waves. So, ideally it will keep
the rate of traffic more even. Now, in standard
RED all kinds of traffic are treated the same.
There is a global threshold, and if the amount
of traffic in the queue crosses the threshold
the device will start dropping traffic randomly as
I said above. However an improved version called
Weighted Random Early Detection, WRED, allows you
to control which packets are dropped depending on
the traffic class. So, you could for example start
dropping HTTP packets when the queue is this full,
FTP packets when the queue is that full, etc.
The kinds of traffic that you configure
as lower-priority will be dropped sooner.
We will cover traffic classes and more
details about how QoS actually works in
the next video. For now, I think this is
a sufficient introduction to the topic.
Okay, before moving on to the quiz let’s review
what we covered. First I introduced IP phones and
voice VLANs. I showed you that an IP phone can
be connected to a switch, and then a PC can be
connected to the IP phone. A voice VLAN can be
configured on the switchport, and the IP phone
will tag traffic it sends using the voice VLAN.
Then I briefly introduced Power over Ethernet,
which allows end devices to receive electric
power via the same Ethernet cable that is used
to send and receive data. It is commonly used for
IP phones, cameras, and wireless access points.
Finally we got to the main topic of the
video, an intro to quality of service,
QoS, which allows you to give special
treatment to specific kinds of traffic,
and it’s commonly used for delay-sensitive
traffic such as video and voice traffic.
However, we only covered the foundational
knowledge in this video, such as defining delay,
jitter, and loss. In the next video we’ll look at
the mechanics of how QoS works. Make sure to watch
until the end of the video for a bonus practice
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA,
the best practice exams for the CCNA.
Okay, let’s go to question 1 of the quiz.
Examine G0/0’s interface configuration. Which of
the following statements are true? Select two.
Okay, pause the video now to look at the
configuration and select the correct answers.
Okay, the answers are A, voice traffic received
by G0/0 should be tagged in VLAN 99, and D,
data traffic received by G0/0 should be untagged.
A phone connected to G0/0 should learn using CDP
that it is in VLAN 99, and then it should tag
traffic it sends in VLAN 99. Now, there is no
SWITCHPORT ACCESS VLAN command on the interface,
so that means it is in the default VLAN, VLAN 1.
Data traffic, for example sent by a PC connected
to the IP phone which is connected to G0/0, will
send its traffic untagged. After SW1 receives the
untagged traffic it will assume it is in VLAN1,
but when it actually receives the traffic it
should be untagged. Okay, let’s go to question 2.
You issue the power inline police
command on a PoE-enabled switch port.
What will happen if the connected device
draws too much power from the switch?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is C, the interface will
be err-disabled and a Syslog message will
be generated. To enable it again, you should
issue the SHUTDOWN command and then NO SHUTDOWN
command on the interface. When you issue the
command, the default action is ERR-DISABLE,
so it’s equivalent to POWER INLINE POLICE ACTION
ERR-DISABLE. Okay, let’s go to question 3.
Which of the following are recommended
standards for acceptable interactive
audio quality? Select three. Pause the
video now to think about the answers.
Okay, the answers are B, delay of 150 milliseconds
or less, C, jitter of 30 milliseconds or less,
and E, loss of 1% or less. If these
standards are not met, you can probably
expect a noticeable reduction in the quality of
the experience. Okay, let’s go to question 4.
Which of the following is a
negative effect of tail drop?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is D, TCP global synchronization.
When a packet queue fills up and tail drop occurs,
all hosts sending TCP traffic will slow down their
rate of transmission in unison, and then increase
it in unison too. This leads to repeating waves
of congestion followed by slower traffic rates.
A TCP sliding window, is merely a mechanic in TCP,
it’s not a negative thing on its own. RED
and WRED are two tools to avoid tail drop,
so they are not a negative effect of
tail drop. Okay, let’s go to question 5.
Which of the following is the default
manner of forwarding queued packets?
Pause the video now to think about the answer.
Okay, the answer is A, FIFO, which
stands for First In First Out. Basically,
it means that packets will be forwarded
in the order they are put into the queue.
Higher priority packets will not be sent to
the front of the queue, for example. B, CBWFQ,
is something I’ll mention in the next video. RED
and WRED, I have already mentioned. They are not
methods of forwarding queued packets, they are
methods of dropping queued packets. Okay, that’s
all for the quiz. Now let’s take a look at a bonus
question from Boson Software’s ExSim for CCNA.
There are supplementary materials for this video.
There is a flashcard deck to
use with the software ‘Anki’.
There will also be a packet tracer practice
lab so you can get some hands-on practice.
That will be in the next video. Sign up for my
mailing list via the link in the description,
and I’ll send you all of the flashcards
and packet tracer lab files for the course.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members. To join,
please click the ‘Join’ button under the video.
Thank you to Sam, Anton, Tebogo, Samil, Anand,
Pavel, Abraham, Serge, Njoku, Viktor, Roger, Raj,
Kenneth, Seamus, Brandon, Aaron, Marcel, Kone,
Donald, C Mohd, Gustavo, Benjamin, Justin,
Prakaash, Nasir, Erlison, Marko, Daming,
Ed, John, Funnydart, Velvijaykum, Mark, Yousif,
Boson Software, Devin, Lito, Yonatan, and Vance.
Sorry if I pronounced your name incorrectly,
but thank you so much for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at the
time of recording by the way, April 11th 2021.
If you signed up recently and your name isn’t
on here don’t worry, you’ll be in future videos.
Thank you for watching. Please
subscribe to the channel,
like the video, leave a comment, and share the
video with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links in the
description. I'm also a Brave verified publisher
and accept BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips
via the Brave browser. That's all for now.